Add Tardigrade launch blog post (#287)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2022-04-25-tardigrade-launch.md

---
layout: post
title:  "ETL in Trino speeds with project Tardigrade: now ready for early users"
author: Andrii Rosa, Brian Zhan, Lukasz Osipiuk, Zebing Lin
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

> After 6 months of challenging work, we’ve launched Project Tardigrade. It is 

Reviewer: > we’ve launched Project Tardigrade

It should say "we've completed Project Tardigrade".

Author: Rephrased to `After six months of challenging work on Project Tardigrade, we are ready to launch.` based on @mosabua suggestion

> designed to improve user experience of running resource intensive queries that

Reviewer: > Its goal is to improve ....

Author: Rephrased the section based on @mosabua suggestion

> are common in ETL space. It’s available right now! It required some significant

Reviewer 2: in the Extract, Transform, Load (ETL) and batch processing space.

Reviewer 2: Get rid of "Its available.. " sentence.

> and fascinating engineering to get us here. Read on to learn how Project 

Reviewer 2: to get us to the current status. The latest Trino release includes all the work from Project Tardigrade. Read on to learn how it all works and how to enable the fault tolerant query processing in Trino.

> Tardigrade works and how to enable it. We think you’ll enjoy hearing about it.

Reviewer: Tardigrade is not a "feature". It's a *project* to add a different execution model to Trino that will support a number of new use cases. So, in general, we shouldn't be referring to how to "enable tardigrade", or "tardigrade is available", "how tardigrade works", etc.

<!--more-->

> ## What is Project Tardigrade

Reviewer 2: What is Project Tardigrade?

> What we love most about doing ETL with Trino is that you get fast query speeds,

Reviewer 2: This is the outcome.. why state that at the start? I would move the paragraph to later

> What we love most about doing ETL with Trino is that you get fast query speeds,

Reviewer: ETL is an overloaded term. We should describe what kind of workloads we're talking about. In fact, what we're referring to as ETL here differs from the traditional meaning of ETL. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extract,_transform,_load

Author: Rephrased to

> What we love most about Trino ...

 and you can iterate fast with intuitive error messages, interactive 

>  experience, and query federation.

Reviewer 3: nit: unnecessary indentation

One of the big problems that had bugged us for a long time is that doing 
long-running ETL workload with Trino is hard. You've probably heard of the 
below issues:

> * Reliable landing times: Queries that run for hours can fail and restart 

Reviewer 2: Maybe use italics

```
* _Reliable landing times:_ Queries... 
```

and similar for next items

  from scratch. This wastes CPU resources and makes it hard for you to meet 

>   your data landing SLA. 

Reviewer 3: They do not restart by themselves. I would word it:
```
Queries that run for hours can fail. Restarting them from scratch wastes ....
```

* Cost-efficient clusters: Trino queries that need terabytes of distributed 

>   memory require extremely large clusters today due to lack of iterative 

Reviewer 2: clusters due to the lack of

  execution.
* Concurrency: Multiple independent clients may submit their queries 
  concurrently. Due to the lack of available resources at a certain moment some
  of these queries may need to be killed and restarted from zero after a 
  while. This makes the landing time hardly predictable.

> While it is certainly possible to 

Reviewer 2: Reword.. too much hedging .. just be definitive .. It can be done with a large team of experts .. but that is not accessible to most Trino users..

[structure your workload to avoid these problems](https://engineering.salesforce.com/how-to-etl-at-petabyte-scale-with-trino-5fe8ac134e36) 
it might not be easy to maintain for every company and may not always be
possible for certain use cases.

> Project Tardigrade is designed to provide an "out of the box" solution for the

Reviewer: re: "Project Tardigrade is designed to ...", see my comment above. The phrasing should be "The goal of Project Tardigrade is to provide ..." or "Project Tardigrade introduces a new design to provide..."

> aforementioned problems. We’ve created an innovative architecture (you can read

Reviewer 2: make the word "innovative architecture" the link .. 

and also .. i think this should NOT be a google doc .. in what gmail account is that anyway .. better to create a PDF and upload to the trino site as binary and link to it.. you can add it in this PR maybe .. or  we could port the whole document to markdown in a git repo..

Reviewer: > innovative architecture

I don't think there's anything innovative about the architecture. We've just applied well-known techniques and adapted them to Trino's architecture.

> aforementioned problems. We’ve created an innovative architecture (you can read

Reviewer 3: nit: `aformnentioned` -> `those`/`problems mentioned above`?

about it [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18QQy8dkZQDNiBPEe3bsyt3RhImCKye4fUJB8bvoeLBI)
and track ongoing developments 

> [here](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/9101)) that allows us to 

Reviewer 2: dont use "here" for link .. maybe the "track ongoing developments" the descriptive link text

Author: Let me move it to the "Closing Notes"

Author: Actually let me remove it for now. Not sure if we will keep reusing this issue for the future ventures.

> implement an advanced resource aware scheduling with granular retries. 

Reviewer 2: resource-aware

> What this means is:

Reviewer 2: Empty line above and below this sentence

* When your long-running queries experience a failure, they don’t have to start

>   from scratch

Reviewer 2: scratch.

* When queries require more memory than currently available in the cluster they

>   would still be able to succeed

Reviewer 2: they are still able to succeed.

> * When multiple queries are submitted concurrently they would be able to share

Reviewer 2: they are able to share resources in a fair way, and make steady progress.

  resources in a fair way and make steady progress

> Trino will do all the hard work behind the scenes of allocating, configuring,

Reviewer 2: Trino does all the hard work of allocating, configuring and maintaining query processing behind the scenes.

and maintaining the queries. Instead of spending time tuning Trino clusters to

> match your workload requirements or reorganizing your workload to match your

Reviewer 2: requirements, or

> Trino cluster capabilities you spend your time doing analytics and delivering

Reviewer 2: capabilities, you can spend your time on analytics and

business value. And most importantly, your heart won’t skip a beat when you
wake up in the morning wondering whether that query landed on time.

> ## What Have We Done To Test It Out?

Reviewer 2: What did we test so far?

Since there's no publicly available testing query set for ETL use cases, we
handcrafted hundreds of ETL-like queries based on the TPC-H and TPC-DS datasets.

To simulate real world settings, we deployed a Tardigrade cluster of 15
`m5.8xlarge` nodes and repeatedly executed thousands of queries over datasets
of different sizes (`10GB` / `1TB` / `10TB`). The queries were executed
sequentially as well as with concurrency factors of 5, 10, and 20. Failure
recovery capabilities were tested by crashing a random node in a cluster every
couple of minutes while streaming a live workload. 

## How Do I Enable Granular Retries?

> Tardigrade can only be enabled for an entire cluster.

Reviewer: "Fault tolerant execution can only be enabled ...". See comment about regarding using Tardigrade as the name of a feature.

In general, we recommend splitting your long-running ETL queries and
short-running interactive queries into different clusters. This will ensure the

> long running ETL queries are not impacted by resource utilization spikes

Reviewer: It's generally the opposite -- interactive workloads are affected by background jobs and cause a bad user experience.

created by interactive workload. Please note that any short-running,

> interactive queries on a Tardigrade cluster may experience higher latencies due

Reviewer: See above regarding using "Tardigrade" as the name of a feature

to checkpointing mechanisms.

#### Recommended hardware

> We recommend deploying coordinator and workers on machines with `32` vCPUs,

Reviewer: This is very dependent on workload. What's the context of this recommendation?

Author: This set of properties is hardware dependent:

```
  * `task.concurrency=8`
  * `task.writer-count=4`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-target-task-input-size=4GB`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-target-task-split-count=64`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-task-memory=5GB`
```

I wanted to provide an easy to follow configuration guide without diving to much into details

`128GB` memory and `10Gbit/s` network (for example `m5.8xlarge` EC2 instance
on AWS).

#### Configuration

> First you need to create an S3 bucket for the data to be spooled on (currenty

Reviewer 3: `for the data to be spooled on` -> `for spooling`?

> only AWS S3 is supported). We recommend configuring a bucket lifecycle rule to

Author: We didn't test with MinIO thoroughly. I would probably like to refrain from explicitly mentioning that we support other file systems.

automatically expire abandoned objects in an event of a node crash:
<img src="/assets/blog/tardigrade-launch/bucket-lifecycle.png"/>

Second you need to configure exchange manager. It can be done by creating the
`etc/exchange-manager.properties` configuration file in the Trino working
directory on coordinator and on each worker with the following configuration:
  * `exchange-manager.name=filesystem`
  * `exchange.base-directories=s3://<bucket-name>`
  * `exchange.s3.region=us-east-1`
  * `exchange.s3.aws-access-key=<access-key>`
  * `exchange.s3.aws-secret-key=<secret-key>`

> And last you need to configure and enable task level retries:

Reviewer 3: .... by changing `etc/config.properties` (or is that obvious)?

Author: Let me add it

> And last you need to configure and enable task level retries:

Reviewer: > Lastly, you need to ...

  * `retry-policy=TASK`
  * `query.hash-partition-count=50` (more than 50 is currently not supported by
    the filesystem exchange implementation)

It is also recommended to enable compression to reduce amount of data spooled
on S3 (`exchange.compression-enabled=true`) as well as reduce the low memory
killer delay to allow resource manager to unblock nodes running short on memory

> faster (`query.low-memory-killer.delay=0s`). Additionally we recommend enabling

Reviewer: > Additionally,

automatic writer scaling to optimize output file size for tables created with

> Trino (`scale-writers=true`) what could be critical for using Trino as an ETL

Reviewer: The grammar in this sentence is off. Did you mean "which" instead of "what"?

Also, why would it be critical (needs some more context)?

Author: Without scaled writers enabled Trino may end up writing tiny files (as the top level stage tasks will be writing output files directly, and since there could potentially be many of them it may result in very small files being generated).

engine.

To increase overall throughput and reduce resource related task retries we
recommend adjusting the concurrency settings based on the hardware
configuration you have chosen. Here is the set of properties you need to set
for the recommended hardware configuration (`32` vCPUs, `128GB` memory and
`10Gbit/s` network):
  * `task.concurrency=8`
  * `task.writer-count=4`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-target-task-input-size=4GB`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-target-task-split-count=64`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-task-memory=5GB`

## Deploying on AWS with Helm and Kubernetes

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To test out Tardigrade features, you will at least need a cluster with a dedicated coordinator and at least two workers for a minimal level of parallelism and performance. The quickest and easiest way to provide all of these specifications we mentioned above is by using the [Trino helm chart](https://artifacthub.io/packages/helm/trino/trino) with a provided Values.yml below and deploying a cluster to the AWS EKS cloud service. If you are not familiar with deploying Trino on Kubernetes, I recommend you take a look at the Trino Community Broadcast episodes covering [local Trino on Kubernetes](https://trino.io/episodes/24.html) and [deploying Trino on EKS](https://trino.io/episodes/31.html).

```

---
layout: post
title:  "Project Tardigrade Is Ready For Early Users/Contributors"
author: Andrii Rosa, Lukasz Osipiuk, Zebing Lin, Brian Zhan
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

After 6 months of challenging work, we’ve launched Project Tardigrade. 
It’s available right now! Read on to learn how Project Tardigrade works. 

> It required some significant and fascinating engineering to get us there. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
It required some significant and fascinating engineering to get us here. 
```

I think you’ll enjoy hearing about it.

 <!--more-->

## What is Project Tardigrade

> If you’ve done big data analysis before, you probably had to guess which engine to to use based on the expected memory load. 

Reviewer 5: to to
```suggestion
If you’ve done big data analysis before, you probably had to guess which engine to use based on the expected memory load. 
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Project Tardigrade Is Ready For Early Users/Contributors"
author: Andrii Rosa, Lukasz Osipiuk, Zebing Lin, Brian Zhan
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

After 6 months of challenging work, we’ve launched Project Tardigrade. 
It’s available right now! Read on to learn how Project Tardigrade works. 
It required some significant and fascinating engineering to get us there. 
I think you’ll enjoy hearing about it.

 <!--more-->

## What is Project Tardigrade

> If you’ve done big data analysis before, you probably had to guess which engine to to use based on the expected memory load. 

Reviewer 3: It is a very indirect way of saying that Trino can  not support queries which require a lot of memory while "other" engines can. 
IMO saying it explicitly - maybe using a bit softer wording than "can" and "can not" - would make this paragraph easier to consume.

Author: Good point. Rewrote the `What is Project Tardigrade` secion.

If you guessed too low, you would be stuck converting your query to run elsewhere. 
If you guessed too high, you wouldn’t be able to take advantage of Trino (like query federation, speed, standard SQL). Is there be a better way?

> Project Tardigrade means you don’t have to think about what memory usage. Of course there are nodes hard at work handling your query’s requests, but that’s our problem, not your’s. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Project Tardigrade means you don’t have to think about memory usage. Of course there are nodes hard at work handling your query’s requests, but that’s our problem, not your’s. 
```

We do all the hard work behind the scenes of allocating, configuring, and maintaining the queries. 
Instead of spending time choosing between engines, you spend your time doing analytics and delivering business value.
 
We’ve created an innovative architecture that allows us to do granular retries. 
This means that when your long-running queries fail, they don’t have to start from scratch: they’ll restart from the latest checkpoint. 
See the below architecture diagram. The downside is that short-running queries will slow down slightly. 
But long-running queries will often land faster thanks to restarting from a checkpoint. 
And most importantly, your heart won’t skip a beat when you wake up in the morning wondering whether that query landed on time: your long-running queries will have far more reliable landing times:
<img src="/assets/blog/tardigrade-launch/tardigrade-diagram.png"/>

## What Have We Done To Test It Out?

> Since there's no publically available testing query set for ETL use cases we had to hand craft hundreeds of ETL like queries based on the TPC-H and TPC-DS data set.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Since there's no publically available testing query set for ETL use cases we had to hand craft hundreeds of ETL-like queries based on the TPC-H and TPC-DS data set.
```

> Since there's no publically available testing query set for ETL use cases we had to hand craft hundreeds of ETL like queries based on the TPC-H and TPC-DS data set.

Reviewer 6: @arhimondr Do we have plans to release this set of queries? Customers are going to ask.

Author: It feels like we should be able to do this. Currently the queries are hosted in Starburst org (https://github.com/starburstdata/trino-verifier-queries), we should be able to move it to Trino org.
@joshthoward @martint What do you think?

Author: Moved https://github.com/trinodb/trino-verifier-queries

> We deployed a Tardigrade cluster of 15 `m5.8xlarge` nodes and repetedly executed thousands of queries over datasets of different sizes (`10GB` / `1TB` / `10TB`). The queries were executed sequentially as well as with concurrency (`5`, `10`, `20`). The failure recovery capabilities have been tested by crashing a random node in a cluster every couple of minutes while streaming a live workload. 

Reviewer 5: Technically with project Tardigrade it's no longer streaming, right?

Also do we want to briefly mentioned the performance comparison?
```suggestion
We deployed a Tardigrade cluster of 15 `m5.8xlarge` nodes and repetedly executed thousands of queries over datasets of different sizes (`10GB` / `1TB` / `10TB`). The queries were executed sequentially as well as with concurrency (`5`, `10`, `20`). The failure recovery capabilities have been tested by crashing a random node in a cluster every couple of minutes in the middle of the query.
```

Author: By streaming i rather meant "while *running* a live workload" :-) Let me change it.

> Also do we want to briefly mentioned the performance comparison?

Not sure. I'm not sure the results are comprehensive enough to share especially given we are testing with a query set that is not publicly available.

## How Do I Enable Granular Retries?

> We recommend deploying coordinator and workers on machines with `32` cores, `128GB` memory and `10Gbit/s` network (for example `m5.8xlarge` EC2 instance on AWS).

Reviewer 7: @arhimondr - to eliminate confusion about hyper threading, can you call it 32 vCPU instead of cores?

  * `task.concurrency=8`
  * `task.writer-count=4`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-target-task-input-size=4GB`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-target-task-split-count=64`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-task-memory=5GB`

## FAQ

* Queries are failing with `software.amazon.awssdk.services.s3.model.S3Exception: Please reduce your request rate`:
  * If your workload is IO intensive it is possible that the S3 may start throthling some of the requests. The request limits are enforced per bucket. It is recommended to create another bucket for spooling to allow Trino to balance workload between them `exchange.base-directories=s3n://<first-bucket>,s3n://<second-bucket>`
* Queries are failing with `Task descriptor storage capacity has been exceeded`: 
  * Trino has to maintain descriptors for each task in case it has to be restarted in an event of a failure. This information is currently stored in memory on coordinator. In the future we are planning to implement adaptive spilling for task descriptors, but at the momement there's a chance queries may hit this limit. If this happens we recommend:
    * Run less queries concurrently
    * Deploy a coordinator with more memory

>     * In the future we are going to implement 

Reviewer 5: Incomplete sentence

---
layout: post
title:  "ETL in Trino speeds with project Tardigrade: now ready for early users"
author: Andrii Rosa, Brian Zhan, Lukasz Osipiuk, Zebing Lin
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

After 6 months of challenging work, we’ve launched Project Tardigrade. It is designed to improve user experience of running resource intensive queries that are common in ETL space. It’s available right now! It required some significant and fascinating engineering to get us here. Read on to learn how Project Tardigrade works and how to enable it. We think you’ll enjoy hearing about it.

<!--more-->

## What is Project Tardigrade

> What we love most about doing ETL with Trino is that it’s fast. It lets you use the same dialect between interactive and ETL and it allows you iterate fast through intuitive error messages, interactive experience, and query federation.

Reviewer 8: suggest change to:

"What we love most about doing ETL with Trino is that you get fast query speeds, and you can iterate fast with  intuitive error messages, interactive experience, and query federation."

> If you’ve done large scale ETL processing before, you probably had to deal with following problems:

Reviewer 8: add "with Trino" ahead of "before"

Reviewer 8: suggest re-write to: One of the big problems that had bugged us for a long time is that doing long-running ETL workload with Trino is hard. You've probably heard of the below issues:

> * Some queries may need to spend thousands of cpu / hours and multiple hours of runtime on pre-processing large data sets what makes them wasteful or sometimes even impossible (without breaking an SLA) to restart in an event of a failure. 

Reviewer 8: "what" should be "which"

> * Some queries may need to spend thousands of cpu / hours and multiple hours of runtime on pre-processing large data sets what makes them wasteful or sometimes even impossible (without breaking an SLA) to restart in an event of a failure. 

Reviewer 8: suggest re-write to (for better clarity):

* Reliable landing times: Queries that run for hours can fail and restart from scratch. This wastes CPU resources and makes it hard for you to meet your data landing SLA.

> * Other queries may need multiple terabytes of distributed memory to generate large dimentional datasets. To accomodate these queries a Trino cluster has to be upscaled to the point when there is enough memory available. This often ends up being not very cost efficient.

Reviewer 8: suggest re-write to:

* Cost-efficient clusters: Trino queries that process terabytes of distributed memory require extremely large clusters today due to lack of fault tolerance.

Author: Changed it to

> Cost-efficient clusters: Trino queries that need terabytes of distributed memory require extremely large clusters today due to lack of iterative execution

> * Multiple independent clients may submit their queries concurrently. Due to the lack of available resources at a certain momement some of these queries may need to be killed and restarted from zero after a while. This makes the landing time hardly predictable.

Reviewer 8: suggest putting at the front of the bullet:

* Concurrency:

* When your long-running queries experience a failure, they don’t have to start from scratch
* When queries require more memory than currently available in the cluster they would still be able to succeed
* When multiple queries are submitted concurrently they would be able to share resources in a fair way and make steady progress

Trino will do all the hard work behind the scenes of allocating, configuring, and maintaining the queries. Instead of spending time tuning Trino clusters to match your workload requirements or reorganizing your workload to match your Trino cluster capabilities you spend your time doing analytics and delivering business value. And most importantly, your heart won’t skip a beat when you wake up in the morning wondering whether that query landed on time.

## What Have We Done To Test It Out?

> Since there's no publically available testing query set for ETL use cases, we handcrafted hundreds of ETL-like queries based on the TPC-H and TPC-DS datasets.

Reviewer 8: typo. "Publicly" not "publically"

## Potential issues

* Queries may start failing with `software.amazon.awssdk.services.s3.model.S3Exception: Please reduce your request rate`:
  * If your workload is I/O intensive it is possible that the S3 may start throttling some of the requests. The request limits are enforced per bucket. It is recommended to create an another bucket for spooling to allow Trino to balance the load `exchange.base-directories=s3://<first-bucket>,s3://<second-bucket>`
* Queries may fail with `Task descriptor storage capacity has been exceeded`: 
  * Trino has to maintain descriptors for each task in case it has to be restarted in an event of a failure. This information is currently stored in memory on coordinator. In the future we are planning to implement adaptive spilling for task descriptors, but at the momement there's a chance queries may hit this limit. If this happens we recommend:
    * Run less queries concurrently
    * Deploy a coordinator with more memory

## Closing notes
  
Want to write about your experience using this, or become a community code contributor? Reach out to us about your submission, and we’ll send swag over as thank you for your submission.

> Want to get a free hosted Trino cluster to try things out? Reach out to Brian Zhan (brianjzhan@gmail.com).

Reviewer 8: Suggest change to (to look more professional):

Want to get a free hosted Trino cluster to try things out? Fill out this form: https://forms.gle/6ac7csb9feMdD1mv9

In general, we recommend splitting your long-running ETL queries and short-running interactive queries into different clusters. This will ensure the long running ETL queries are not impacted by resource utilization spikes created by interactive workload. Please note that any short-running, interactive queries on a Tardigrade cluster may experience higher latencies due to checkpointing mechanisms.

### Recommended hardware

We recommend deploying coordinator and workers on machines with `32` vCPUs, `128GB` memory and `10Gbit/s` network (for example `m5.8xlarge` EC2 instance on AWS).

### Configuration

First you need to create an S3 bucket for the data to be spooled on (currenty only AWS S3 is supported). We recommend configuring a bucket lifecycle rule to automatically expire abandoned objects in an event of a node crash: <img src="/assets/blog/tardigrade-launch/bucket-lifecycle.png"/>

Second you need to configure exchange manager. It can be done by creating the `etc/exchange-manager.properties` configuration file in the Trino working directory on coordinator and on each worker with the following configuration:
  * `exchange-manager.name=filesystem`

>   * `exchange.base-directories=s3n://<bucket-name>`

Reviewer 5: s3n is old scheme
```suggestion
  * `exchange.base-directories=s3://<bucket-name>`
```

  * `exchange.s3.region=us-east-1`
  * `exchange.s3.aws-access-key=<access-key>`
  * `exchange.s3.aws-secret-key=<secret-key>`

And last you need to configure and enable task level retries:
  * `retry-policy=TASK`
  * `query.hash-partition-count=50` (more than 50 is currently not supported by the filesystem exchange implementation)

>   * `enable-dynamic-filtering=false` (currently not supported)

Reviewer 5: How about distributed sort?

Author: We disable it automatically. Actually I wonder if we should do the same for dynamic filtering for now? Then once we support dynamic filtering it can be enabled transparently?

Reviewer 5: I don't know, may better keep it consistent.

Author: https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/12037

> It is also recommended enabling compression to reduce amount of data spoled to S3 (`exchange.compression-enabled=true`) as well as reducing the low memory killer delay to allow resource manager to unblock nodes running short on memory faster (`query.low-memory-killer.delay=0s`). Additionally we recommend enabling automatic writer scalling to optimize output file size for tables created with Trino (`scale-writers=true`) what could be critical for using Trino as an ETL engine.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
It is also recommended to enable compression to reduce amount of data spooled to S3 (`exchange.compression-enabled=true`) as well as reduce the low memory killer delay to allow resource manager to unblock nodes running short on memory faster (`query.low-memory-killer.delay=0s`). Additionally we recommend enabling automatic writer scaling to optimize output file size for tables created with Trino (`scale-writers=true`) what could be critical for using Trino as an ETL engine.
```

To increase overall throughput and reduce resource related task retries we recommend adjusting the concurrency settings based on the hardware configuration you have chosen. Here is the set of properties you need to set for the recommended hardware configuration (`32` vCPUs, `128GB` memory and `10Gbit/s` network):
  * `task.concurrency=8`
  * `task.writer-count=4`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-target-task-input-size=4GB`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-target-task-split-count=64`
  * `fault-tolerant-execution-task-memory=5GB`

## Potential issues

* Queries may start failing with `software.amazon.awssdk.services.s3.model.S3Exception: Please reduce your request rate`:

>   * If your workload is IO intensive it is possible that the S3 may start throthling some of the requests. The request limits are enforced per bucket. It is recommended to create an another bucket for spooling to allow Trino to balance the load `exchange.base-directories=s3n://<first-bucket>,s3n://<second-bucket>`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  * If your workload is I/O intensive it is possible that the S3 may start throttling some of the requests. The request limits are enforced per bucket. It is recommended to create another bucket for spooling to allow Trino to balance the load `exchange.base-directories=s3n://<first-bucket>,s3n://<second-bucket>`
```
